Reddit post from r/arabs:

My (very long) review of Inventing Lebanon, by Kais Firro

So the post about Lebanon's treatment of Palestinians was brigaded and a bunch of salty guys showed up to talk about Arabs complaining, how Saudi is worse than Lebanon, and other nice cliches. I've mentioned this book dozens of times on this sub and I love it, so since I'm staying home tonight to rest, now is a good time to finally write up this review:

____________________________________

Despite what the title suggests, the author is not especially critical towards Lebanese nationalism. He begins by summarizing the movements and groups within Lebanon that called for Lebanism, and then compares that to the Syrianists and the Arabists. In fact, if he has any intellectual predisposition, it is against nationalism in general, as he repeatedly quotes scholars who are critical of nationalism such as Hobsbawm, Ernest Gellner, Anthony Smith, Paul Brass, and Benedict Anderson. A general background knowledge is definitely required, as he references the Ma'ans, Shihabs, the Emirate, and the Mutassarrifate immediately and without explaining much about them, although to be fair doing so would require an entire other book.

His critique of the Lebanists - the proponents of a Greater Lebanese state - shows that the concept was extremely muddled to begin with, both territorially and in terms of identity. Many of the most prominent intellectual proponents of Lebanism fluctuated in their ideology with the changes in French policy, from Syrianism to Arabism to Lebanism. One early proposal for Greater Lebanon ranged from southern Turkey to Egypt! (p. 19). Some definitions of Lebanese identity were solely Christian, for example Khairallah Khairallah's book which argued that Mount Lebanon was "Lebanese rather than Druze". (p. 23) Many of the Lebanists had first been Syrianists until the change in French policy [in 1919 towards the Greater Lebanon project], such as George Samne and Shukri Ghanim. The Phoenicianist Jacques Tabet who seemed to be strongly anti-Arab and somewhat anti-Muslim, initially wrote in 1916 that Syrians were Phoenician people and that "Lebanon is the core of Syria" p.26. He argued that those Lebanese Christians in Egypt who supported Arabism were "collaborators with Egypt and Britain." Samne oddly argues that the Phoenicians were a Semitic people who originated from the Persian Gulf. Tabet argues that they originated in the heart of Syria, but that the culture of the Phoenicians had survived in the region through millennia of occupiers and invaders (except the Crusaders, who were protectors) most purely in the Maronite people. He also argues for the ethnic purity of the Syrian Phoenician race. Michel Chiha, the writer of Lebanon's constitution, meanwhile, tried to undercut Arabism by arguing that Lebanon was not semitic thanks to all the non-semitic people who had settled it, but that these various races coalesced into a distinct ethnic group under the Phoenicians. He then tried to undercut the links to Syria by arguing that the crusaders settled with the people of Lebanon. It is remarkable to see how similar these Lebanist authors (Samne, Tabet, Ghanim, Chiha, al-Sawda, etc.) were to the Zionists in their language and ideas. Their ideology was replete with mythologizing and romanticizing a vague ancient civilization, and their rhetoric was infused with talk of "rebuilding" a glorious powerful state that had not existed for many thousands of years. They both also emphasized the role of danger - how Israel (as a homeland for Jews) and Lebanon (as a homeland for Christians/Maronites) must always live under the threat of the other ("the transient").

After a brief overview of the Arabist discourse in Lebanon, which he claims to have been far more popular amongst the masses than Lebanism, Firro then moves on to analyze the fluctuating positions of Kamal Salibi, Lebanon's foremost historian. Prior to the civil war in 1966, his writing was effluent with complimentary views of Lebanon as a state. In 1985, Salibi declared that "in all but name, Lebanon today is a non-country." (p.43) Then he paradoxically argues that through this war, the Lebanese have morbidly developed for the first time a shared common identity. Salibi also argues, ironically, that the Maronites and Shi'is and Druzes all have their ethnic origins in Arabia.

Next, Firro discusses the how the competing narratives of the 1920s still dominate political discussion today. He breaks it down into 6 groups.

- Unity in Diversity - Antoine Messarra and Ilya Harik: 

confessionalism is the natural primordial element of Lebanon that has always existed and keeps Lebanon alive as a state

- Arab Lebanon - Munah al-Sulh and al-Fadl Shalaq: 

Lebanon is a single culture, Arab culture, but its separation from the Arab world is a fait accompli. It is a sectarian state because it was designed to be sectarian from the beginning. Solution is that minorities must abandon their separatism, and the Arab-Muslim majority must create a democratic rational framework to address the insecurities of minorities.


 - Colonialism at the Root of Confessionalism - Anis al-Sayigh and Joseph Mughayzil: 

Lebanon is an Arab country and confessionalism is a direct result of French colonialism. Sits within Marxist discourse, arguing that confessionalism has historically been used as political instrument by elites.


- Arab-Muslim Tradition vs. Western Colonialism - Ma'n Ziyada and Wajih Kawtharani: 

There is only one culture in Lebanon: Arab-Muslim culture. Lebanon was arabized before Islam and remained Arab after it, and the existence of minorities doesn't negate that fact. Confessionalism is a result of Ottoman and European colonialism.


 - Hyphenating Confessionalism and Class - Mas'ud Dhahir and Mahdi Amel

Marxist point of view. Dahir argues that confessionalism is "directly determined by economic factors, ie., by a European power subordinating the country to the demands of market capitalism, whereby the class struggle was played out behind the ideological disguise of confessionalism."p.56

- Confessionalism is nothing - Mehdi Amil

Similar to Dahir's views, Amel is a Marxist who argues that the confessional system is a political tool of Maronite domination. "Consequently Maronitism permeates beyond the frontiers of the community and history... the Phoenicians are Maronitized." He argued that the confessional system is an extension of the feudal class system, and that it relies on al-iqta'at al-siyasiyya, the clan and confessional representatives to allow the bourgeoisie to dominate. This creates a natural system of competition and dispute between the confessions. "...'Amil insists that only in the historical circumstances of the class struggle as it was played out since the Mandate did the confessional form of this struggle emerge. This leads him to deny the existence of al-ta'ifa (the confession) as an ethnic group in the modern sociological sense: "Al-ta'ifa, therefore, is not an entity. It is not essence. It is nothing. It is a political relationship determined by a certain historical form of the class struggle which is controlled by the bourgeoisie in the political absence of its class alternative."p.65 Amil is also closer to the Arabists, although he criticizes them for also using the primordial argument.


After this, Firro then transitions from Amil's and Dahir's analyses to spend some time discussing the emergence of the state confessional system and Lebanon's class-clan structure. There is an interesting comparison of the mafia system in Sicily with Lebanon's rural zu'ama and qabadayat (tough men). This discussion is dominated by French political and economic policies that favoured the Maronite community. There were violent riots all over Lebanon at the start of the Mandate, and France even proposed returning territories such as Tripoli to Syria proper (p.78). The decline of Druze in positions of political power is touched upon, and then French designs to use the Mandate areas as cashcows, "using the region as a source of raw materials for France and as an import market for finished European goods" p.85. Interestingly, one French strategy of disconnecting Mandate Lebanon from Mandate Syria was through high tariff barriers on transactions between the two. (p.127). Muslim rejectionism is also discussed, particularly that of the Sunnis. Eventually, France would soften them to the idea of the state through a combination of harsh repression (arrests and exile of Sunni rejectionists), and what Firro calls, the Carrot and Stick policy, of economic and political incentives to elites within the new state.

This then leads to a discussion of the state elite. Chapter 3 covers statistics on how many families had deputies in the parliament at certain periods, highlighting the oligarchical and dynastic nature of Lebanon from its inception. Chapter 4 is concerned with showing how the French Mandate brought into existence a different form of patrimonialism that had existed during the Ottoman period, and the author tries to track and posthumously catalog the rise of the state elite into their current positions of power. He carefully traces individual families from their rejectionist Arab nationalist position, to acceptance of the Greater Lebanon project and their swift accession into the state bureaucracy.

The author then begins a long discussion on feudalism and large land owning families in the chapter entitled "Between Town and Countryside". He runs through different power relationships and different forms of contracts, such as mugharasa and musaqa (long-term) in the mountains and muzara'a (short-term) in tobacco farming areas (p.90). Then land ownership in different areas of Lebanon, such as the latifundia and musha' systems.

From this the author transitions into a discussion on the titles of the state elite, and the anarchic proliferation of titles and honorifics through the entire society. He recounts how the French approached the Sunni branch of the al-Shihab family to break the Muslim boycott of the new state, and: "As it would safeguard their entitlement to top-ranking public offices, the Shihabi princes did not hesitate long before they accepted this invitation "to ascend Mt. Hermon"." P.92. Whereas some Sunni families were exiled for their rejectionist stance of the state under the accusation of conspiracy in the assassination of Sa'id Pasha Khurshid, other Sunni families saw this as an opportunity "to join the zu'ama who in the past would never have been able to secure a position in the elite stratum." P.93. Once the Muslim boycott of the new state was broken, this then engenders a discussion on the formation of the new bureaucratic state elite from the previous class of zu'ama and landowners. He cites other studies to show that "62% of the members of the various parliaments between 1920 and 1970 were related through the kinship attachments prevailing among them," and that "35% of all parliament seats were monopolized from 1920 to 1972 by no more than 6 families." P.97

In Chapter 4, 'Did the System Create the Zu'ama or Vice Versa?', Firro traces the first Sunni families who break the Muslim boycott of the state in 1925-26 and take part in the government of Dabbas. The Sulh, Salam, and Karami families became more hardline rejectionist, while the High Commissioner turned to leading merchants and zu'ama, allowing them to climb the social ladder in ways they could not previously. This leads to the December 1926 government of August Adib that mixes successful urban merchants and rural landlords. Firro then discusses the rise to prominence of Sheikh Muhammad al-Jisr. He was appointed Speaker of Parliament and was supported by the French authorities and by the Maronites and propped up as the representative of all Muslims, to counter the weight of prominent Sunnis (`Abd al-Hamid Karami, `Abd al-Latif al-Bisar and `Arif Hasan al-Rifa'i) who had been...